I actually have the privilege
of introducing one of the more
emotional and energetic sessions of
the Developers Conference this year.
And actually that makes a lot of sense
because it's the energies of developers
like yourselves that actually made
what is the internet actually happen.
This session is actually
going to go through and talk
a bit about Mac OS networking.
This is networking in
Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
So with that,
I'd like to introduce Justin Walker,
who is the manager of the
Mac OS X networking team.
Thank you.
I've never been associated
with high energy,
so I'm not sure what Tom meant by that.
Anyway,
So let's start.
What we're going to do
today is talk about...
Networking in our two systems,
Mac OS X is what I'll cover,
and then we'll have Lefty come up and
give you his trademarked walkthrough of
the current state of Mac OS 9 networking.
So to begin with,
we'll set the stage by looking
at a diagram that shows you
where we're going to be focusing.
This is a diagram of Mac OS X,
which you've probably seen
a couple of times before.
And the important part for
us is the networking area,
which is in the kernel of Mac OS X.
An important point to note,
which we've emphasized before
and will continue to emphasize,
is that the kernel and the
Core OS of Mac OS X is Darwin.
And Darwin is a public source
operating system that we want
developer involvement in.
I'll do my best.
Maybe we'll get somebody
to crank up the volume.
Anyway,
the Darwin OS is a publicly available OS,
and we've got a website set up for it,
which you will have heard about if
you were here on Monday afternoon.
In networking, just to review, we have...
Network stack that's based on BSD,
and in particular,
it's been upgraded within
the last year to a relatively
recent version of FreeBSD.
And we're providing full multi-homing
and routing capabilities for
both AppleTalk and for IPv4.
And as part of the upgrade
to the FreeBSD code,
we imported mechanisms to
support firewall and NAT.
[Transcript missing]
I want to go over what we've done in
the past year and then talk a little
bit about what's coming up beyond DP4.
Among other things,
we've introduced kernel extensions,
PPP support, the new stack,
and some capabilities that
I've already mentioned.
And coming up,
we'll talk a little bit about IPv6,
IPsec,
and something we're calling mobility
for want of a better term right now.
So we've shipped DP1 through DP3,
which was the release that
contained the new networking stacks.
And these products included improved
Carbon OT support focused on
performance and some new features.
In February,
we shipped a kernel development kit,
which included support for
network kernel extensions and
documentation for developing them.
In DP4, which you've now got a copy of,
we have a number of
improvements I want to discuss.
Shared addresses for IP between the
classic environment and Mac OS X.
Some more improvements in OT in Carbon.
And a little bird told
us we had to have PPP,
so that's in there.
We've got full DHCP support
both in client and server,
including ad hoc networking.
And we've been continuing to
make progress on a socketization
of the AppleTalk code.
NKEs are fully supported in DP4,
and actually they're a significant
part of the operation of DP4 today.
Our support for shared IP with
Classic is done with NKE,
and PPP is also implemented with NKEs.
The development mechanisms in DP4
for kernel extensions supersede
the KDK in a number of areas,
so the header files and documentation
have been upgraded to reflect that.
And coming up in the future,
we want to improve support in this area.
Particularly, we want to look at support
for new device families,
for example, for Token Ring,
and improve the way we handle
Socket and Datalink MKEs.
The bottom line here is feedback from
you as developers is an important aspect
of how we plan and schedule our work.
For PPP, we're supporting serial
connections in this release,
specifically the internal
and external modems.
We use chat scripts.
Those of you familiar with BSD and
Linux style PPP will know what those are.
They're, I guess, a poor man's CCL.
Dean Reese will be talking about modem
family support and the networking device
session that comes up Friday morning.
And you'll want to attend
that if this is in your area.
For API support,
we have a socket API that is OT-like
in the sense that it directly mirrors
the OT PPP control APIs from Mac OS 9.
And those APIs are implemented
in our Carbon OT stack.
Configuration.
The dialer app that is in the
system demos directory on DP4 is
handling the UI for configuration.
And in addition,
if you're a glutton for punishment,
you can fill in the
traditional BSD flat files.
But the intent here is that you
either configure through the dialer
API or through another mechanism that
I'll be discussing in a little bit.
Also, our aim over the long haul is to
support PPP over whatever the developer
and customer community require.
Particular areas that we've heard
requests for Ethernet and DSL.
And the support will be integrated
in with the rest of PPP.
So for example,
the dialer will be able to recognize the
kinds of devices that are in the system.
The devices that support PPP and
the same APIs that are used for
serial will work for PPP over
Ethernet and other mechanisms.
Let's talk some about classic networking.
By popular demand,
we've eliminated the need to provide
multiple IP addresses for each platform,
one for classic and others for Mac OS X.
[Transcript missing]
The classic implementation will
gather all of the configuration
parameters that are important for
OT from Mac OS X and install them
in the configuration database.
The control panel is read-only,
so you can see what your parameters are,
but you cannot modify them.
As I'll show in a minute,
the reliance here is on OT for routing.
Any packet transmission is
handled fully by OT as far
as the IP stack is concerned.
In Mac OS X,
the implementation splits the flow
of packets below the 10 stacks
so that they are not directly
involved in packet traffic.
So let me take a look at the
operation of this mechanism.
We've got the classic
application with the OT stack,
relatively unchanged.
It opens up a special socket and
binds to a chosen network device.
and installs an NKE,
which will be used to handle
outbound traffic from OT.
The different colors indicate
the direction of flow.
So a packet going out from OT will
be written into the socket.
Socket NKE will look at the packet
and determine whether it is destined
for the wire or gets essentially
looped back to the TEN stack.
Likewise, when network traffic comes
in through the device,
it's intercepted by an NKE.
Based on information within a packet,
a decision is made whether it goes
upstream to the 10 stack or whether
it's handed off to the classic
stack via the special socket.
The same thing happens for AppleTalk,
except that in the case of AppleTalk,
there's no combination of addresses.
Each stack is fully
separate and independent.
So let's take a look at how
TCP and UDP traffic is handled.
The OT stack has been modified
to handle port sharing,
which means that we treat both
stacks as using the same port
address space for both TCP and UDP.
When there's an OT bind call,
it comes into OT,
it is directed down through the
socket and then over to the IP stack
to do a bind within the 10 stack.
And if that succeeds,
the success is propagated back
up the stack to OT and the
normal OT operations continue.
So, for example,
if you wanted to run a web server within
OT and there was not one running on 10,
you can fire it up and it will take
over port 80 and all traffic to
port 80 will be diverted to classic.
If the port reserve fails,
then the bind will fail and
the operation will not succeed.
Moving to Carbon,
we've done a lot of work on performance
and we're now at a position where when
we run the same tests on Carbon on 10
and on Mac OS 9 on the same platform,
we get similar performance.
As far as we can measure, it's on a par.
The support for control APIs is there
based on the OT PPP APIs from Mac OS 9.
One point that we want to make for
developers using OT in Carbon is that
you can't make assumptions about thread
behavior the way you could in Mac OS 9.
You have to use atomic operations and
make sure you're using the proper enter,
leave notification.
[Transcript missing]
OT on 9 uses cooperative threading,
cooperative task operations,
whereas on Mac OS X,
threads are preemptive.
In AppleTalk,
we've updated Carbon and OT to
handle a number of new mechanisms.
In Server Provider APIs, we support ZIP,
we support DDP endpoints,
and we support the NBP Mapper APIs.
Apple has decided that Apple Talk is
a legacy protocol and we're not
going to put any more effort into it.
So in particular,
that means no PAP or ATP support.
And as always, we listen.
So if you have concerns about this,
you need to talk to
Developer Relations and Marketing so
they can give us the proper direction.
Finally, we've fixed a bunch of
bugs and it's very stable.
If you saw the demos of
Internet Explorer using Carbon,
that was all done over the Carbon OT.
We've got DHCP support in DP4.
It's full client and server,
so you can act as either.
It's RFC compliant with all of
the musts of 2131 implemented
and most of the shoulds.
In addition,
the DHCP engine will handle ad
hoc or zero-conf networking.
If the DHCP server you're trying
to contact doesn't respond,
then we will auto-configure an
address for you in the range
that's been dictated by the ITF.
And the DHCP engine will continue
to probe for DHCP servers.
And in the case that it
eventually finds one,
that auto-configured
address will remain in you.
So existing connections and existing
programs will continue to run,
but the system can now function
based on its DHCP address as well.
In addition, we'll be looking at more
integration with the zero-conf
work that's going on in the IETF.
And I think Lefty will have some more
to say about dynamic DNS support and
the direction that we're heading there.
Beyond DP4, we're looking at something
we're calling mobility,
just for having a simple
phrase to capture it.
What we're looking at is mechanisms
that we can put in place to simplify
configuration change and management.
We want to be able to change
the address without a reboot.
We want to be able to
put the system to sleep,
wake it up, have it deal with changing
networking environments around it.
And with net configuration
change in general,
as might be forced by, say,
a user running a configuration panel.
We're bringing in native support
for the Mac Network Setup APIs.
I'll talk a little bit
more about that later.
And we're implementing IPv6 and IPsec.
And we've got two sessions tomorrow
to discuss that in more detail.
So let's look at what
this mobility stuff is.
We want to be able to live
in a dynamic environment.
Things like the
Energy Star requirements from EPA,
power books,
other portable mechanisms can
move around or go to sleep,
wake up,
and find the environment changed.
We want to provide the ability to
make those transitions smooth and
adapt automatically to the new
environment as it's found by the system.
So let's look at a really colorful
diagram starting from the bottom
[Transcript missing]
This allows us to have a common view
of configuration information and to
interlock access to that information
so that multiple applications could be
modifying this information or watching
for modification at the same time.
Another component,
which I indicated earlier,
was kernel event delivery.
These are events that will come
up from network devices and
network stacks as things change.
And finally, that central engine is
the configuration daemon.
It's a daemon that runs as
long as the system is up.
We're building a plug-in architecture
so we can extend it dynamically.
It detects changes from
devices by waiting for events.
It can detect changes based on action
from applications like the control panel.
And system components like PPP can
notify it when something changes.
For example,
a link comes up or a link goes down.
And pieces of data that are
kept and affected by these
events include default routes,
IP addresses, DNS information, and so on.
We have APIs that allow an application
to register to get notifications
when certain kinds of events occur.
And we have APIs that allow the
applications that modify this
data to notify the rest of the
system when a change has been made.
So to go back just briefly to
put it into a picture again,
events come up from below,
are cached in the ConfigDemons cache,
and trigger notifications that
can go to interested applications.
And we have a mechanism with the
Network Setup APIs to let control
panels and similar applications
modify and display current
configuration information.
In the future,
we're going to work towards
a more integrated system of
configuration management.
The aim is to get seamless
changes supported.
For example,
you can use airport in a live
environment and track base
station change and the like.
One of the interesting areas
for a developer is how to
handle a change like this.
There are issues of security.
Do you want to believe exactly
what the information you receive
from the network tells you?
Or do you have to provide
a filter of some kind and
prompt a user for information?
It's a complicated problem.
I have no idea how complex it is,
but it doesn't seem to lend
itself to an easy solution.
Another issue we're going
to look at moving forward is
the IETF's mobile IP support,
both for IPv4 and for IPv6.
And again, I'm soliciting input.
Talk to me, talk to the rest of our team,
talk to the developer
relations guys and marketing.
Give us your input as to what you
think is needed in this arena.
IP is kind of the ubiquitous
protocol these days,
and there are good reasons
to think about changing.
The IETF has a new generation of IP,
and it's called IPv6.
Support in Mac OS X is on the way,
and we'll be talking
more about that tomorrow,
both for IPSec and for IPv6.
Tomorrow, we'll tell you more about how
to get access to a package which
includes both protocol sets,
tools, and libraries, and headers,
as well as a kernel that supports it,
so that you can begin to
experiment for those of you
who want to get down and dirty.
The implementation we
use comes from Kame.
It's a project based on a consortium
of Japanese manufacturers who are
very interested in propagating IPv6.
They've done a whole lot
of work on these protocols,
and they're currently the
de facto implementation for
all of the BSD projects,
and we're adapting it
to use for Mac OS X.
Check the developer website under
Mac OS X for details tomorrow.
And now with that,
I'll hand it over to Lefty
to talk about Mac OS 9.
Thanks, Justin.
Hi, everybody.
Has it been a year already?
Good grief.
So, I'm David Schlesinger.
I'm the manager of the Mac OS 9
networking team and I'm going to talk
a little about what we did last year.
We're going to do the thing I guess
that Justin was referring to when he
talked about trademarking the talk.
We do it every year.
We go through the list of what
developers have requested and
where we stand on those requests.
And then I'm going to give you some
idea of some of the things that
we're looking at working on now.
So, what did we do last year?
We came out with two sort of
general releases of OpenTransport.
We had an OpenTransport 2.5.2,
and we had various flavors
of OpenTransport 2.6.
And if you've got Software Update active,
you've probably gotten
each and every one of them.
So, 2.5.2 shipped with Mac OS 9.
And one of the big changes that
we made there was that finally,
after having been out for several years,
we upgraded our core streams
and TCP implementations.
The streams and TCP that had been
in Open Transport prior to OS 9
actually dated all the way back to the
original version of Open Transport.
And it had become more and
more difficult to maintain,
and we were missing out on a lot
of features that the folks over
at Mentat had been putting in.
And basically,
we took all of the old stuff
out and put all new stuff in.
And that was a very major change.
It went a lot more smoothly
than we thought it might.
So, we were pretty happy with that.
We have learned a lot about DHCP.
We thought DHCP was
pretty straightforward.
We were wrong.
Boy.
There are lots of varying
interpretations of little points in DHCP,
it seems.
There are lots of corner cases
that we hadn't quite thought of.
But I think we may have
found every single one.
But I'm hoping.
PPC-over-IP.
Now this is something that
I'm very excited about.
Apple events have been
around for a while now,
but they're limited to
Apple Talk Networks,
which really places a real strict limit
on the context in which you can use them.
What we did in OS 9 is we
expanded the PPC protocol to
work over a substrate of IP.
So, instead of only being limited
to doing Apple scripting,
remote Apple scripting,
in the context of your
Apple Talk Network,
you can now do it across the internet.
You can effectively run an Apple script
or send Apple events that will
affect a machine all the way across
the country or around the world.
And this gives a lot of power
and a lot of flexibility,
particularly to people like
systems administrators,
ISPs, all kinds of applications for this.
So, that's very exciting.
And I think we're going to be doing
a lot more of this in addition.
More DHCP fixes.
We found out that DHCP...
[Transcript missing]
Network Setup 1.1.
We introduced Network Setup
in Mac OS 8.5,
and this was a planned upgrade.
We had mostly bug fixes in there.
We reduced open transport from
six libraries down to two,
thereby freeing up valuable real
estates in your extensions folder.
And over 250 bug fixes.
So all kinds of things
are working better now.
It's a lot more stable.
We've got a lot of performance
improvements for some kind of
peculiar cases we ran into.
So lots of good stuff went into 2.5 too.
2.6 is essentially what
we call a dot release.
It's got a bunch of bug fixes.
And specifically,
it shipped with Mac OS 901, 902, 903,
904.
And it may keep shipping for a while yet.
I don't know.
32 bugs fixed, all told.
I sat down and counted them.
And guess what?
They're mostly DHCP fixes.
But it's working better than ever.
We're happy with that.
And if you have any DHCP problems,
be sure to see me right
after the presentation.
Okay, so here's the trademarked part.
I don't know how many of you were here
three years ago when I first did this,
but this is a list that Richard Ford,
who was then our marketing guy, compiled,
I guess, about four years ago.
And if you've been paying attention,
you'll notice that the size of
the type has probably tripled
since the first time I used it.
We've got 51 items on
this list right here,
and if that seems like a lot,
you weren't here three years ago.
Because we had, I think, 175.
So, every year,
I go through and I tell people what
on this list we've been working on,
and as we get them done, I take them off,
and the list gets shorter and shorter,
and the typeface gets bigger and bigger,
and eventually I'm going to have, like,
one item in 48-point type.
At any rate, here are the things that we
managed to do over the last year.
We've got better admin utilities,
network assistant particularly,
Apple Events over IP, I mentioned,
IP personal file sharing, and again,
both of these things, PPC over IP,
Apple Events over IP,
IP personal file sharing,
are all in line with the strategy
that we've been following
over the past several years,
AppleTalk was a fine idea.
It was a good thing.
It's out of date.
Nobody's using it, really,
except in very limited contexts,
and it's not where things
are going in networking,
clearly.
So,
in order to preserve the valuable aspects
that we put into AppleTalk way back when,
and there are many of those,
we have been transferring some of the
most important uses of AppleTalk files,
file sharing, Apple Events,
and what have you,
so that they can operate
in an internet environment,
and PPC over IP and IP file sharing
are just two examples of that,
but this is really a
core strategy for us.
Okay, what's left?
Still got a bunch of things there.
We have limited engineering bandwidth,
and as I said,
this list is four years old.
And I thought it was like a
really good time at this point
to sort of step back and say,
well, you know,
here are a bunch of things,
and we haven't gotten any of
these in the last four years.
In my best estimate,
what are the ones that probably are
not worth the effort for us right now?
And this is pretty much
what I came up with.
Nobody screamed.
Good.
Okay, great.
Anyway, Apple Talk Multihoming,
Apple Talk Routing.
We've had these in the past.
We had a product called
Apple Internet Router once upon a time,
which I actually supported.
I don't see a lot of call for that.
I certainly have not had anybody
ask me for ADSP optimizations
in I don't know how long.
ATM enhancements, same kind of thing.
I don't see us doing a lot of built-in
kind of file system specific clients.
I don't see a com toolbox
replacement on the horizon,
I'm afraid.
IPX, IPX over PPP, ISDN, multi-link PPP,
more of the same.
So these are things that we
basically decided are not going
to remain on our list anymore,
so I've taken the
liberty of excising them.
And here's what we have left,
and here's what we're
working on right now.
Obviously, right at the top of the list,
bug fixes.
We never have enough bug fixes.
Yes?
[Transcript missing]
I'm glad to have that feedback.
Remember, this is our take on things
from where we're standing,
and if something I say
doesn't make any sense,
let me know it doesn't make any sense,
and I'm happy to rethink it.
Bug fixes.
DNSSEC is something
that we're looking at.
Justin referred to dynamic
DNS a little earlier,
but dynamic DNS and
DNSSEC really interlink.
You don't want to be dynamically updating
names of networked entities out there,
unless you've got some kind of
security associated with it.
So I don't see us doing
the one without the other.
IP multi-homing is something
that people have been requesting
for I don't know how long.
We are actively working on it right now.
We have prototype implementations,
various places that are
doing various things,
and we're making a lot of
progress in that space.
IP second, IP v6.
Justin has referred to previously,
and I'm going to go into those in
just a little more detail here,
but I want to save the really good stuff
for tomorrow when we've got sessions
dedicated to both of those subjects.
We are working on a unified
control panel for networking,
so that rather than having to
deal with seven different ones,
you've only got to deal with one.
And we've demonstrated various
incarnations of that as time has gone on.
Plug and play IP auto configuration
is sort of a long way of saying,
"I'm using IP v6." And again,
tomorrow in the IP v6 session,
I'm going to go into a lot of detail
about what that's all about and why
it's important and why you should care.
And finally, RTP, PPP compression.
This isn't just RTP.
It's IP, UDP, TCP,
RTP header compression for serial links,
which is a real performance
enhancement for applications like
streaming media and what have you.
have you.
So, these are the things that we're
actively engaged in these days.
I wanted to break this out in
a little more readable format,
but this is roughly our order
of priorities on this thing,
and there's a reason for that.
IP multihoming and IPsec, it turns out,
are prerequisites for doing IPv6.
So, in order to get that in,
I have to get these in first.
Now, these are features that have
value in their own right,
but they head the list because
I can't do what I really want to
do until I do those things first.
I think we really ought to get
familiar with it right now.
All of the proliferation of wireless
devices has created a situation
where all of you folks with airport
cards are beaming all kinds of
information all over the place.
We had a little experiment a while
back when we first got our set of base
stations and airport cards over at Apple.
We sat out in the parking lot with one
to see if we could see what was going on.
You bet.
So,
we're very careful about using VPNs and
limiting who can use which base stations,
but security over networking
is very important,
and that's the point
you should grasp here.
People spend a lot of money on firewalls,
but once you put a wireless
card in your laptop,
your firewall is not doing you
a lot of good at that point.
So, this is very important.
We're going to talk more
about this tomorrow.
Multicast DNS, this is interesting.
[Transcript missing]
What you have to supply as the developer
is the actual key management logic.
If you want to have Ike,
then you've got to implement
it on top of what we give you.
You've got to deliver the
actual protocol arbitration.
We deliver just the core.
We're going to have more details
on that at the IPsec session,
and that is 3.30 tomorrow next door.
Multicast DNS I already
talked a little bit about.
It's an extension of standard
DNS that's being worked on in
large part by the IETF being led
by one of our engineers here,
Stuart Cheshire.
Again,
it's intended to support ad hoc networks.
It's solving a similar
problem to dynamic DNS,
but not in and of itself.
Effectively,
we're putting a multicast DNS kind
of micro-server into each Macintosh,
and you'll register names with this
server in an analogous way to the
way that you register NBP names now.
You'll do it through a mapper object.
So the analogy is pretty
straightforward there.
Okay, we're looking at making
Open Transport callable from MP threads.
Now,
it turns out that this is one of those
things that also has prerequisites.
The thing that we basically needed
to do to make all of this work was
get rid of Open Transport reliance
on Apple's shared library manager,
which was a fine idea way
back when once upon a time,
but it's been supplanted by CFM.
It's essentially unsupportable.
We're hoping that very few people use it,
and if you are using it right now,
we hope you'll stop soon.
The reason that we want to do
this is basically to lay the
groundwork so that we can put,
as an alternative to
the standard OT APIs,
a sockets interface on
top of OpenTransport.
There's no sense in my doing
that unless it's semantically
accurate when compared with a Unix
machine running the same APIs.
So I need to have some kind
of real robust threading in
there in order to do that,
and that's what the goal
of this essentially is.
IPv6.
Next Generation Internet.
There are a lot of reasons that I'm
not going to get into in great detail
today because I've got a big long
presentation on this for tomorrow.
A lot of reasons why you
should be interested in IPv6.
There, people talk about the address
space being exhausted.
That's not true.
It's not getting exhausted.
It's just been badly
misallocated all along.
The big problem that we face right now
is a combinatorial routing problem.
Every time more nodes get
added to the Internet,
that's more things that more
routers have to remember.
The real problem is that IPv4
addresses carry no inherent
routing information in them.
The router has to remember everything
just based on the IP address.
IPv6, just to give you a quick preview,
gives you the capability of
constructing addresses in such
a way that they actually carry
routing information in them.
There are other points of IPv6 that
simplify and speed up all kinds
of aspects of using the Internet.
We're going to talk in detail
about that tomorrow at 5:00.
I hope you'll come to that
if you've got an interest in.
I hope you do.
Again, async AppleTalk initialization.
We've substantially reduced boot
and wait times and about time too.
Okay, I want to talk very quickly about
where we're going on remote access.
The main feature that we brought
out with remote access in the last
year was whereas we had previously
shipped only a client version,
we're now shipping full client server.
This is basically the same remote access
product that went out in a box once upon
a time that people paid good money for.
It's now part of the regular
operating system distribution.
The plans that we've got in the upcoming
year are mostly around PPP multi-homing,
and that's in line with our
work on multi-homing for
the rest of open transport.
As I mentioned earlier,
we're working on the advanced header
compression that's specified in,
what is it, RFC 2349, I guess,
and elsewhere.
We're working on support for the
extensible authentication protocol,
which is being more widely used and
has been requested by an organization.
We're working on the advanced header
compression that's specified in,
what is it, RFC 2349, I guess,
and elsewhere.
We are working on giving you
finer control over the framing
that's applied to the byte stream
coming through remote access,
which will simplify implementation
of alternative links for
people who are doing things
like PPPoE and what have you.
And again, we're looking at adding IPv6
support in there as well.
Okay,
so time to talk about endangered species,
as I do every year.
There are some things
I would like to have go away.
I don't think anybody much uses them.
I'm here to ask you to let me know if
I'm grossly wrong about these things.
I'm pretty sure that Mac IP is
not being very heavily used.
We've been carrying it
around for a lot of years.
It's tunneling IP through Apple Talk,
and it's just not a wonderful idea.
It places all kinds of limitations
and restrictions on things.
It would simplify our lives
considerably if that could just go away.
Nobody's told me it can't,
but if you have a different opinion,
you should definitely let us know.
This is an old one you've heard before.
Prefs files, they're still going away.
I know that all of you
have been working very,
very hard on getting onto
the network setup database,
APIs,
and that's what you should be doing.
I am proposing... Actually getting rid
of the prefs files this time around.
And again, if somebody has a major
objection to that,
they should definitely let us know.
Because I don't want to cause problems,
but I do want to simplify matters.
In remote access,
it's about time that we said goodbye
to the Apple Remote Access Protocol.
I don't see any real need... Really?
I would have done it last year.
Okay, well, that's for sure then.
Okay, so we've got some additional
resources that relate to the various
points that we've mentioned here.
There's the Mac OS IPv6
and IPsec package,
which you'll be able to find under the
Mac OS page on developer.apple.com.
The Project Kame homepage
is at www.kame.net.
The IPv6 forum is at www.ipv6.org.
Mentat's homepage,
if you're interested in learning
more about the core code that
goes into open transport,
is at mentat.com.
And the IPv6 conformance testing
information is at tahi.org.
We have related sessions.
We've got this one right now,
which is certainly related,
but you've probably
missed most of it by now.
Tomorrow, we've got IPsec in Mac OS at
3.30 in the room next door,
followed immediately by IPv6 in Mac OS.
And both of those, I think,
are going to be well worth attending.
These are largely going to
take the form of technology
introductions and overviews.
So if you're not familiar with IPsec
or you're not familiar with IPv6 and
you want to get more information,
these are really good sessions
for you to be attending.
There's going to be a lot of
interesting and informative stuff there.
Also, Dean Reese is going to be
having the I/O Kit Networking
Hardware Seminar at 10.30 in the
morning on Friday in this room.
And finally,
I really strongly encourage everybody
who has an opinion to share to
come to the NNC Feedback Forum.
There used to be previous years
we had one for 9 and one for 10,
but we've unified those
as well this year.
So if you want to tell us what a great
job we're doing or tell us what a bad
job we're doing or something in between,
come to room J1 Thursday, 10.30 a.m.
for the NNC Feedback Forum.
and contact information, I'm Lefty.
Justin Walker manages the
Mac OS networking group.
Tom Weier is our guy in
Worldwide Developer Relations.
They're all our email addresses.
We love to hear from people as
long as it's not too abusive.
Or even if it is, if it's like
well-thought-out or creative.
and now I'd like to bring Justin and
the Mac OS X networking teams and
the Mac OS 9 networking teams all
up on stage and we can do our Q&A.
Thanks, folks.